Welcome to Anaesthesia Compendium. Today's viva station:
principles of endocrine control and the hypothalamic-pituitary axis.
I shall take the candidate through it, question by question. Let us begin.
Let us begin endocrinology. Outline the organisation of the endocrine system and
compare it with the nervous system.
The endocrine system is one of the two great control and communication systems of
the body, working alongside the nervous system to coordinate and regulate its
functions, and an understanding of its organisation,
and how it compares with the nervous system, is a useful starting point.
The endocrine system controls and coordinates the body's functions by means of
hormones — chemical messengers secreted by the endocrine glands into the blood,
which carries them to act on distant target tissues bearing the appropriate
receptors.
It regulates slow, widespread and sustained processes — growth, metabolism,
reproduction, the response to stress, and the balance of water and electrolytes.
It is useful to compare it with the nervous system.
The nervous system signals rapidly,
by electrical impulses along specific nerves to specific targets, producing fast,
brief, precisely-localised effects; the endocrine system signals more slowly,
by hormones carried in the blood to all tissues, producing slower-onset,
longer-lasting, and more widespread effects.
The two systems are not separate but closely integrated — the hypothalamus being
the key link — and overlap, some chemical messengers serving both.
So the endocrine system controls the body's functions through hormones secreted
into the blood to act on distant targets, regulating the slow, widespread,
sustained processes of metabolism, growth, reproduction and homeostasis;
complementing the nervous system, which signals rapidly and specifically for fast,
brief effects, while the endocrine system acts more slowly and diffusely for
sustained ones — the two integrated, chiefly through the hypothalamus,
as the body's coordinated control systems.
Describe the chemical classes of hormones.
Hormones fall into a small number of chemical classes,
and this classification is useful, because the class of a hormone determines how it
is synthesised, transported and how it acts, so it is worth setting out.
There are three main chemical classes.
The peptide and protein hormones, the largest group,
are chains of amino acids — ranging from small peptides to large proteins;
they include most of the hormones, such as insulin,
the pituitary hormones and many others.
They are water-soluble, synthesised and stored in advance in secretory granules,
and released by exocytosis. The steroid hormones are derived from cholesterol;
they include the hormones of the adrenal cortex and the gonads.
They are lipid-soluble, not stored but synthesised on demand, and,
being lipophilic, are carried in the blood bound to proteins.
The amine hormones are derived from single amino acids:
they include the thyroid hormones, derived from tyrosine,
and the catecholamines of the adrenal medulla, also from tyrosine;
these two amine groups differ in their properties — the catecholamines behaving
like the peptides, and the thyroid hormones like the steroids in being lipophilic
and protein-bound.
So hormones are classified as the peptide and protein hormones — water-soluble,
pre-stored, the largest group; the steroid hormones — lipid-soluble,
cholesterol-derived, made on demand and protein-bound;
and the amine hormones — from amino acids, comprising the catecholamines,
which behave like peptides, and the thyroid hormones, which behave like steroids;
a classification determining how each is made, carried and how it acts.
Describe the mechanisms of hormone action and the two main types of receptor.
Hormones act on their target cells through receptors,
and the mechanism divides into two fundamentally different types according to
whether the hormone can cross the cell membrane,
a distinction following from the chemical class and determining the speed and
nature of the effect.
The dividing principle is solubility.
The water-soluble hormones — the peptides and the catecholamines — cannot cross the
lipid cell membrane, so they act on receptors on the cell surface;
the binding of the hormone to its surface receptor activates intracellular
signalling systems — through G-proteins and second messengers,
such as cyclic AMP and calcium, or through receptors with enzyme activity — which
alter the activity of existing enzymes and proteins in the cell;
the effects are relatively rapid, beginning in seconds to minutes,
and do not require new protein synthesis.
The lipid-soluble hormones — the steroids and the thyroid hormones — can cross the
cell membrane, so they act on intracellular receptors,
in the cytoplasm or the nucleus; the hormone-receptor complex acts on the genes,
altering the transcription of specific genes and so the synthesis of particular
proteins; the effects are slower in onset, taking hours,
because they depend on changes in protein synthesis, but are more prolonged.
So the water-soluble hormones act on cell-surface receptors,
triggering intracellular second-messenger systems that rapidly alter existing
proteins, without new synthesis; while the lipid-soluble hormones cross the
membrane to act on intracellular receptors that alter gene transcription and
protein synthesis, with slower but more prolonged effects — two mechanisms
following from solubility and determining the speed and nature of the response.
Describe the control of hormone secretion and the role of negative feedback.
The secretion of hormones is closely regulated,
so that the level of each is appropriate to the body's needs,
and the principal mechanism of this regulation is negative feedback,
an understanding of which is fundamental to endocrine physiology.
The secretion of a hormone is controlled so as to maintain the regulated variable —
whether that is the hormone's own level,
or the level of something the hormone controls,
such as the blood glucose or calcium — within its proper range.
The principal mechanism is negative feedback: the response to the hormone,
or the level of the controlled variable,
feeds back to inhibit the further secretion of the hormone,
so that the system is self-correcting and stable.
For example, a hormone that raises the blood level of a substance is inhibited as
that level rises, preventing overshoot.
In the case of the pituitary-controlled endocrine glands,
the feedback operates through the axis:
the hormone of the target gland feeds back to inhibit the pituitary and the
hypothalamus that drive it.
Other influences also control secretion — direct effects of substances on the
gland, neural inputs, and other hormones — but negative feedback is the central
principle giving stability. Less commonly, positive feedback operates,
driving a process to completion.
So hormone secretion is regulated to keep the controlled variable within range,
chiefly by negative feedback — the hormone's effect, or the level it controls,
feeding back to inhibit its further secretion,
making the system self-correcting and stable,
and operating through the axes in the pituitary-controlled glands;
with other influences contributing,
and positive feedback operating in special cases — the central principle of
endocrine regulation.
Describe the relationship between the hypothalamus and the pituitary gland.
The hypothalamus and the pituitary gland together form the central control centre
of much of the endocrine system, linking the nervous and endocrine systems,
and their relationship — different for the two parts of the pituitary — is
fundamental to endocrine physiology.
The hypothalamus, part of the brain, is the master integrator,
receiving neural and hormonal information and controlling the pituitary,
which in turn controls many other endocrine glands;
so the hypothalamus links the nervous system to the endocrine system.
The pituitary has two parts, related to the hypothalamus differently.
The posterior pituitary is, in effect, an extension of the hypothalamus:
hormones are synthesised in hypothalamic neurons,
transported down their axons into the posterior pituitary,
and released from there into the blood — a direct neural connection.
The anterior pituitary is a true endocrine gland,
controlled by the hypothalamus not by nerves but by hormones:
the hypothalamus secretes releasing and inhibiting hormones,
which travel down a special portal blood system — a direct vascular link from the
hypothalamus to the anterior pituitary — to control the secretion of the anterior
pituitary hormones.
So the hypothalamus controls the pituitary,
linking the nervous and endocrine systems:
the posterior pituitary being a neural extension of the hypothalamus,
releasing hormones made in hypothalamic neurons;
and the anterior pituitary being controlled by hypothalamic releasing and
inhibiting hormones carried down a portal vascular system — the central control
relationship of the endocrine system.
Describe the hormones of the anterior pituitary and their control.
The anterior pituitary secretes several hormones that control other endocrine
glands and body functions, under the control of the hypothalamus and feedback,
and knowing them and their organisation is important,
as their disorders and the axes they head are clinically significant.
The anterior pituitary secretes six principal hormones.
Several are tropic hormones, controlling other endocrine glands:
the thyroid-stimulating hormone, controlling the thyroid;
the adrenocorticotropic hormone, controlling the adrenal cortex;
and the two gonadotropins, controlling the gonads.
The others act more directly: growth hormone, controlling growth and metabolism;
and prolactin, controlling milk production.
Their secretion is controlled by the hypothalamus,
through its releasing and inhibiting hormones carried down the portal system —
mostly stimulating, but prolactin chiefly under inhibitory control by dopamine.
And it is controlled by negative feedback: for the tropic hormones,
the hormone of the target gland — the thyroid hormone, the cortisol,
the gonadal hormones — feeds back to inhibit the pituitary and hypothalamus,
forming the regulatory axes.
So the anterior pituitary secretes the tropic hormones — thyroid-stimulating
hormone, adrenocorticotropic hormone, and the gonadotropins,
controlling the thyroid, adrenal cortex and gonads — and growth hormone and
prolactin; controlled by the hypothalamic releasing and inhibiting hormones via the
portal system, and by negative feedback from the target glands' hormones,
forming the endocrine axes — the organisation of the pituitary's control of the
endocrine system.
Describe the hormones of the posterior pituitary.
The posterior pituitary releases two hormones, made in the hypothalamus,
and these — antidiuretic hormone and oxytocin — have important functions,
the first especially relevant to fluid balance and anaesthesia,
so they are worth describing.
As discussed, the posterior pituitary is a neural extension of the hypothalamus:
the two hormones are synthesised in the cell bodies of hypothalamic neurons,
transported down their axons, and stored in and released from the posterior
pituitary into the blood, the release triggered by the firing of these neurons.
Antidiuretic hormone, also called vasopressin,
has two main actions reflected in its names: as an antidiuretic,
it acts on the kidney to promote the reabsorption of water,
concentrating the urine and conserving water — the principal hormone regulating
water balance and the plasma osmolality; and, as vasopressin,
in higher concentrations it constricts blood vessels, raising the blood pressure.
Its release is stimulated by a rise in the plasma osmolality,
sensed by hypothalamic osmoreceptors, and by a fall in the blood volume or pressure.
Oxytocin acts on the uterus, causing its contraction in labour, and on the breast,
causing the ejection of milk; its release is stimulated by suckling and by cervical
stretch, examples of neuroendocrine reflexes, the latter a positive feedback.
So the posterior pituitary releases antidiuretic hormone,
or vasopressin — made in the hypothalamus,
conserving water by its renal antidiuretic action and constricting vessels at
higher levels, released by a rise in osmolality or a fall in volume — and oxytocin,
causing uterine contraction in labour and milk ejection,
released by suckling and cervical stretch;
two hypothalamic hormones of importance to fluid balance and reproduction.
Describe the hypothalamic-pituitary-target gland axis and its feedback regulation,
using an example.
The control of the pituitary-dependent endocrine glands operates through a
three-tiered axis, regulated by negative feedback, and setting this out,
with an example, illuminates the general pattern that governs the thyroid,
the adrenal cortex and the gonads.
The pattern is a three-level hierarchy. The hypothalamus, at the top,
secretes a releasing hormone; this stimulates the anterior pituitary to secrete a
tropic hormone; this in turn stimulates the target gland to secrete its hormone,
which produces the effects on the body.
The system is regulated by negative feedback:
the hormone of the target gland feeds back to inhibit the secretion of the
releasing hormone by the hypothalamus and the tropic hormone by the pituitary,
so that the level of the target hormone is held stable.
Take the thyroid axis as an example.
The hypothalamus secretes thyrotropin-releasing hormone;
this stimulates the pituitary to secrete thyroid-stimulating hormone;
this stimulates the thyroid to secrete the thyroid hormones;
and the thyroid hormones feed back to inhibit the hypothalamus and the pituitary,
so that, if the thyroid hormone level rises, the drive is reduced, and if it falls,
the drive is increased — holding the level stable.
The same pattern governs the adrenal cortex and the gonads.
This arrangement explains the patterns of endocrine disease and the effects of
administered hormones.
So the pituitary-dependent glands are controlled through a three-tiered axis —
hypothalamic releasing hormone, pituitary tropic hormone,
and target gland hormone — regulated by the negative feedback of the target hormone
on the hypothalamus and pituitary; as in the thyroid axis,
where thyrotropin-releasing hormone,
thyroid-stimulating hormone and the thyroid hormones form the axis,
the thyroid hormones feeding back to hold their level stable — a pattern governing
the thyroid, adrenal cortex and gonads, and explaining endocrine disease.
Pull it together: how is the endocrine system organised to regulate the body?
I would draw it together around the endocrine system as a hierarchical,
feedback-regulated control system that, through hormones,
maintains the body's internal regulation over the slower timescales.
At the base, hormones — of three chemical classes, peptide,
steroid and amine — carry signals in the blood from the endocrine glands to their
target tissues, acting through surface receptors and second messengers,
if water-soluble, or intracellular receptors altering gene expression,
if lipid-soluble, to produce their rapid or sustained effects.
The secretion of the hormones is regulated, chiefly by negative feedback,
so that each is held at the level appropriate to the body's needs, giving stability.
Much of the system is organised hierarchically under the hypothalamus and
pituitary: the hypothalamus, linking the nervous and endocrine systems,
controls the pituitary — the posterior,
a neural extension releasing antidiuretic hormone and oxytocin; the anterior,
controlled by hypothalamic hormones via the portal system — which in turn,
through its tropic hormones, controls the thyroid, adrenal cortex and gonads,
each axis regulated by feedback.
Through this organisation, the endocrine system regulates metabolism, growth,
reproduction, the stress response, and fluid and electrolyte balance.
So the endocrine system is a hierarchical, feedback-regulated system:
hormones of three classes signalling through their appropriate receptors;
their secretion stabilised by negative feedback;
and much of it organised under the hypothalamus and pituitary,
controlling the peripheral glands through feedback-regulated axes — an organisation
maintaining the body's slower regulation of metabolism, growth,
reproduction and homeostasis.
Describe the transport of hormones in the blood and the significance of protein
binding.
The way a hormone is carried in the blood depends on its solubility,
and for the lipophilic hormones the binding to plasma proteins has important
consequences, so it is worth describing.
The water-soluble hormones — the peptides and the catecholamines — dissolve freely
in the plasma and are carried mostly unbound; they tend to have short half-lives,
being rapidly cleared.
The lipid-soluble hormones — the steroids and the thyroid hormones — are poorly
soluble in the watery plasma, and are carried largely bound to plasma proteins,
some to specific binding globulins and some to albumin,
with only a small fraction free.
This binding has several consequences. Only the free fraction is biologically
active and able to enter the tissues and act;
the bound hormone is an inactive reservoir, in equilibrium with the free.
The binding prolongs the hormone's half-life, protecting it from rapid clearance,
giving these hormones their long durations of action.
And it means that the total hormone level may not reflect the active free level if
the binding protein changes — as the binding globulins do in pregnancy and with
some drugs — a point important in interpreting hormone measurements.
So the active free level is what is regulated.
So the water-soluble hormones are carried mostly unbound, with short half-lives;
while the lipid-soluble steroid and thyroid hormones are carried largely bound to
plasma proteins, only the small free fraction being active and able to act,
the bound forming a reservoir that prolongs the half-life;
the total level not always reflecting the active free level when the binding
protein changes — a transport following from solubility,
with consequences for hormone action and measurement.
Describe the patterns of hormone secretion,
including pulsatile and rhythmic secretion.
Hormones are not generally secreted at a steady, constant rate,
but in patterns — pulsatile, and with daily and other rhythms — and an awareness of
this is important, both physiologically and for the interpretation of hormone
measurements.
Many hormones are secreted in a pulsatile manner — in bursts,
rather than continuously — the pattern and frequency of the pulses carrying
information; indeed, for some hormones the pulsatility is essential to their
action, a continuous level failing to produce the normal effect,
as the pulsatile release of the hypothalamic hormone controlling the gonadotropins
is necessary for normal reproductive function.
Many hormones show a circadian rhythm — a daily variation driven by the body clock
— such as cortisol, highest in the early morning, and others.
Some show rhythms over other periods,
such as the monthly cycle of the reproductive hormones.
Secretion also responds to stimuli — meals, stress, sleep.
The practical importance is in interpreting hormone levels:
because of the pulsatile and rhythmic secretion,
a single measurement may be misleading, and the timing must be considered,
or dynamic tests used — stimulating or suppressing the gland to assess its function.
So hormones are secreted in patterns — pulsatile,
in bursts whose pattern may be essential, as for the gonadotropin control;
with circadian rhythms, as for cortisol; and other rhythms,
as the reproductive cycle; and in response to stimuli;
the pulsatile and rhythmic secretion meaning that single measurements may mislead,
so timing and dynamic tests are used — patterns of physiological and diagnostic
importance.
Describe the role of second messengers in hormone action.
The water-soluble hormones, acting on surface receptors,
produce their effects inside the cell through second-messenger systems,
and an understanding of these is worth having,
as they are central to the action of many hormones and drugs.
Since the water-soluble hormone cannot enter the cell, it binds a surface receptor,
and the message must be relayed across the membrane and amplified within the cell —
the role of the second messengers, the hormone being the first messenger.
Several systems operate.
In the cyclic AMP system, the hormone, through its receptor and a G-protein,
activates the enzyme adenylate cyclase, which produces cyclic AMP from ATP;
the cyclic AMP then activates enzymes that alter the cell's activity.
Many hormones act this way.
In the calcium and phosphoinositide system, the hormone,
through its receptor and a G-protein,
activates an enzyme that generates messengers releasing calcium within the cell and
activating others; the calcium acts as a messenger.
Some receptors have intrinsic enzyme activity,
such as the tyrosine kinase activity of the insulin receptor,
phosphorylating intracellular proteins.
These systems amplify the signal — one hormone molecule generating many messenger
molecules — and allow it to be modulated and integrated.
So the water-soluble hormones act through second-messenger systems that relay and
amplify their signal within the cell: the cyclic AMP system,
generated through a G-protein and adenylate cyclase;
the calcium and phosphoinositide system; and the enzyme-linked receptors,
such as the insulin receptor's tyrosine kinase;
these amplifying and allowing the modulation of the signal — systems central to the
action of many hormones and drugs.
Describe growth hormone and its actions.
Growth hormone is one of the principal anterior pituitary hormones,
important for growth and with significant metabolic actions,
so it is worth describing, including its control and the effects of its excess and
deficiency.
Growth hormone is a peptide hormone secreted by the anterior pituitary,
under the control of the hypothalamus — stimulated by a releasing hormone and
inhibited by somatostatin — and secreted in a pulsatile manner,
particularly during sleep. Its actions are of two kinds.
It promotes growth, particularly the growth of the long bones and so the height in
childhood, an action mediated largely by intermediary factors — the insulin-like
growth factors, produced by the liver under its stimulation.
And it has direct metabolic actions: it tends to raise the blood glucose,
opposing insulin — being one of the counter-regulatory hormones — and it mobilises
fat for fuel and promotes protein synthesis;
so it has an overall effect of promoting growth and lean tissue while mobilising
fat and sparing glucose.
Its disorders are instructive: an excess in childhood, before the bones have fused,
causes excessive growth — gigantism — and in the adult causes acromegaly,
with the overgrowth of the soft tissues and certain bones,
of anaesthetic relevance for the airway changes;
a deficiency in childhood causes short stature.
So growth hormone, from the anterior pituitary,
controlled by a hypothalamic releasing hormone and somatostatin and secreted in
pulses, promotes growth — especially of the long bones — through the insulin-like
growth factors, and has metabolic actions raising the blood glucose,
mobilising fat and promoting protein synthesis;
its excess causing gigantism or acromegaly,
with anaesthetically-relevant airway changes,
and its deficiency short stature — a principal pituitary hormone of growth and
metabolism.
Describe the regulation of antidiuretic hormone secretion in detail.
Antidiuretic hormone is central to the regulation of water balance,
and the control of its secretion — by osmotic and volume stimuli — is worth
describing in detail, as it underlies the body's handling of water and several
clinical disturbances.
Antidiuretic hormone, released from the posterior pituitary,
acts on the kidney to conserve water;
its secretion is controlled so as to regulate the plasma osmolality and,
in volume depletion, to conserve water. There are two main controls.
The principal, and most sensitive, is osmotic:
the osmolality of the plasma is sensed by osmoreceptors in the hypothalamus,
which are exquisitely sensitive to small changes;
a rise in the plasma osmolality — as with water loss — stimulates the secretion of
antidiuretic hormone, which conserves water to dilute the plasma back to normal,
and also stimulates thirst; a fall in osmolality suppresses it,
allowing water to be excreted.
So the osmotic control finely regulates the plasma osmolality.
The second control is by volume and pressure:
a large fall in the blood volume or pressure, sensed by the baroreceptors,
strongly stimulates antidiuretic hormone secretion — overriding the osmotic control
— to conserve water and, at high levels, to constrict the vessels,
helping to defend the circulation in haemorrhage.
So the volume stimulus is less sensitive but more powerful when strongly activated.
Disturbances of this control cause the syndromes of inappropriate secretion and of
diabetes insipidus.
So antidiuretic hormone secretion is controlled by a sensitive osmotic mechanism —
the hypothalamic osmoreceptors stimulating it when the osmolality rises,
to conserve water and finely regulate the osmolality,
with thirst — and by a less sensitive but powerful volume mechanism — a large fall
in volume or pressure strongly stimulating it to defend the circulation;
the controls underlying water balance and its disorders.
Describe the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion and diabetes
insipidus.
The two principal disorders of antidiuretic hormone — its excess and its deficiency
— produce contrasting disturbances of water balance,
and an understanding of them follows from the hormone's action,
and is relevant to the perioperative period, so they are worth describing.
The syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion is an excess,
or inappropriate secretion, of the hormone — secreted when it should be suppressed,
not in response to the normal osmotic or volume stimuli;
it occurs in various conditions, including certain tumours, lung and brain disease,
and with some drugs and after surgery.
The excess hormone causes excessive water retention by the kidney,
diluting the body fluids; so the plasma becomes dilute,
with a low plasma sodium — a dilutional hyponatraemia — which is the principal
feature and danger, causing the neurological consequences of hyponatraemia.
Diabetes insipidus is the opposite — a deficiency of antidiuretic hormone,
or a failure of the kidney to respond to it; the kidney cannot conserve water,
so a large volume of dilute urine is passed, and the patient becomes thirsty and,
if unable to keep up with the water loss, dehydrated,
with a rising plasma sodium and osmolality.
It occurs after pituitary or hypothalamic surgery or injury,
and in other conditions. Both must be recognised and managed perioperatively.
So the syndrome of inappropriate antidiuretic hormone secretion is an excess of the
hormone, causing water retention and a dilutional hyponatraemia with its
neurological dangers; while diabetes insipidus is a deficiency,
or unresponsiveness, causing the passage of large volumes of dilute urine,
thirst and, if uncompensated, dehydration with hypernatraemia;
contrasting disorders of water balance, relevant perioperatively,
following from the hormone's water-conserving action.
Describe the general patterns of endocrine disease.
Endocrine diseases, though numerous, follow a few general patterns,
and recognising these provides a useful framework for understanding them,
following from the principles of hormone action and the axes,
so it is worth setting out. The disorders fall into broad patterns.
Most fundamentally, there is an excess or a deficiency of a hormone's action —
hyperfunction or hypofunction — producing, respectively,
an exaggeration or a loss of the hormone's normal effects;
so knowing the hormone's actions allows the features of its excess and deficiency
to be predicted, as we have seen for the thyroid and others.
Within these, the disorder may arise at different levels of the axis,
which it is important to distinguish.
A primary disorder is in the target gland itself — for instance,
primary hypothyroidism from thyroid disease; here, by the feedback,
the tropic hormone from the pituitary changes in the opposite direction — rising in
primary deficiency, as the feedback is released.
A secondary disorder is in the pituitary — too little or too much tropic hormone;
and a tertiary disorder in the hypothalamus.
Distinguishing the level is done using the feedback relationships,
measuring the target hormone and the tropic hormone together.
Other patterns include resistance to a hormone, despite adequate levels,
and disorders of the secretory pattern.
So endocrine diseases follow general patterns:
an excess or deficiency of hormone action — hyperfunction or hypofunction — whose
features follow from the hormone's actions; arising at different levels — primary,
in the target gland; secondary, in the pituitary; tertiary,
in the hypothalamus — distinguished by the feedback relationships and the tropic
hormone level; with resistance and secretory disorders as further patterns — a
framework following from hormone action and the axes.
Describe the integration of the endocrine and nervous systems.
Although we distinguish the nervous and endocrine systems,
they are in fact closely integrated,
and an appreciation of how they interconnect completes the understanding of the
body's control systems, so it is worth describing.
The two systems, while differing in their speed and mode,
are integrated in several ways.
The key anatomical link is the hypothalamus,
which is part of the brain — receiving neural information — yet controls the
endocrine system through the pituitary; so the nervous system,
through the hypothalamus, governs much of the endocrine system,
allowing the brain to direct endocrine responses to the environment, to emotion,
and to the body's state.
The posterior pituitary is a direct neural-to-endocrine link,
neurons releasing hormones. The autonomic nervous system controls some endocrine
secretions directly — as it drives the adrenal medulla,
and influences the islet hormones.
Conversely, hormones act on the brain, influencing its function,
mood and behaviour, and providing feedback.
Some chemical messengers serve both systems,
acting as neurotransmitters and as hormones.
The two systems thus work together — the stress response being a clear example,
integrating the neural sympathetic and the endocrine cortisol responses under
central control.
So the nervous and endocrine systems are closely integrated:
chiefly through the hypothalamus, part of the brain yet controlling the pituitary
and so the endocrine system, allowing the brain to direct endocrine responses;
through the neural posterior pituitary and the autonomic control of glands;
through the actions of hormones on the brain;
and through shared messengers — the two working together,
as in the stress response, as the body's integrated control systems.
Describe the principles of hormone replacement and the use of hormones as drugs.
Many hormones are used as drugs — to replace a deficiency,
or for their pharmacological effects — and the principles of this follow from
endocrine physiology, so an outline is worth giving. There are two broad uses.
The first is replacement, in hormone deficiency: giving the hormone,
or a substitute, to replace what the gland fails to produce — as thyroxine in
hypothyroidism, insulin in diabetes, and cortisol in adrenal insufficiency;
the aim is to restore the normal level and effect,
the dose guided by the clinical state and hormone levels,
and ideally mimicking the normal pattern of secretion.
The second is the pharmacological use of a hormone's effects,
often at higher than physiological doses,
for a therapeutic action — most importantly the use of the glucocorticoids for
their anti-inflammatory and immunosuppressive effects in a wide range of conditions.
Several principles follow from the physiology.
The route and form must suit the hormone — the peptide hormones, being digested,
generally cannot be given by mouth and are injected,
while the steroid and thyroid hormones can be given orally.
Importantly, giving a hormone suppresses the body's own production through the
feedback — so prolonged glucocorticoid treatment suppresses the adrenal axis,
which must then be considered, and not stopped abruptly, and covered during stress.
So hormones are used as drugs for replacement — restoring a deficiency,
as with thyroxine, insulin and cortisol,
ideally mimicking the normal pattern — and pharmacologically,
for their effects at higher doses, as the glucocorticoids for inflammation;
the route following from the hormone's nature,
and the suppression of the body's own production by feedback being an important
consideration, as with steroid treatment suppressing the adrenal axis — principles
following from endocrine physiology.
Describe the endocrine response to surgery and stress.
Surgery and other stresses provoke a characteristic,
coordinated endocrine response, the understanding of which draws together much of
endocrine physiology and is of direct relevance to anaesthesia,
so it is worth describing.
The stress of surgery — the tissue injury, the pain,
and the other stimuli — provokes a stereotyped neuroendocrine response,
coordinated by the hypothalamus in response to the neural and other signals,
which mobilises the body to cope with the insult.
Its endocrine components are several,
mostly acting to mobilise energy and conserve fluid.
The hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis is activated,
increasing the secretion of cortisol,
which mobilises fuel and supports the cardiovascular system.
The sympatho-adrenal system is activated, releasing catecholamines.
The counter-regulatory hormones — cortisol, catecholamines,
growth hormone and glucagon — are increased,
while insulin secretion is relatively suppressed or its action resisted;
the net effect is to raise the blood glucose and mobilise the fuel substrates — the
hyperglycaemia and catabolism of the stress response.
Antidiuretic hormone and aldosterone are increased,
promoting the retention of water and sodium.
The overall response is catabolic and fluid-conserving,
mobilising resources to meet the demands of injury.
Anaesthesia and analgesia, particularly regional techniques that block the afferent
signals, can attenuate this response.
So surgery provokes a coordinated endocrine stress response:
the activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis increasing cortisol,
the sympatho-adrenal system releasing catecholamines,
and the counter-regulatory hormones rising while insulin is suppressed — raising
the blood glucose and mobilising fuel — with antidiuretic hormone and aldosterone
retaining water and sodium; a catabolic,
fluid-conserving response mobilising resources for injury,
attenuated by anaesthesia and regional techniques — drawing together endocrine
physiology in a response of direct anaesthetic relevance.
Thank you. A clear opening account. Let us stop there.
Before we close, here are the take-home messages.
First, The endocrine system controls slow, widespread,
sustained processes (metabolism, growth, reproduction, stress,
fluid/electrolyte balance) via hormones secreted into the blood to act on distant
targets — complementing the nervous system (rapid, specific, brief).
The two are integrated, chiefly through the hypothalamus.
Second, Hormone classes: peptide/protein (water-soluble, pre-stored, largest group,
e.g. insulin); steroid (lipid-soluble, cholesterol-derived, made on demand,
protein-bound, e.g.
cortisol); amine (from amino acids — catecholamines behave like peptides,
thyroid hormones like steroids).
Mechanism follows Third, Hormone secretion is regulated chiefly by negative
feedback — the hormone's effect or the controlled variable feeds back to inhibit
further secretion, making the system self-correcting and stable.
Fourth, The hypothalamus controls the pituitary,
linking nervous and endocrine systems:
the posterior pituitary is a neural extension (ADH/vasopressin and oxytocin made in
hypothalamic neurons, released there);
the anterior pituitary is controlled by hypothalamic releasing/inhibiting hormones
via the portal vascular system.
Anterior pituitary hormones: TSH, ACTH, the gonadotropins (tropic),
plus growth hormone and prolactin (prolactin under dopamine inhibition).
Fifth, Pituitary-dependent glands are controlled through a three-tiered axis
(hypothalamic releasing hormone → pituitary tropic hormone → target gland hormone),
regulated by negative feedback of the target hormone on the hypothalamus and
pituitary (e.g.
TRH → TSH → thyroid hormones). Posterior pituitary:
ADH conserves water (renal antidiuresis) and constricts vessels at higher levels
(released by ↑ osmolality or ↓ volume);
oxytocin causes uterine contraction and milk ejection.
Thank you. That concludes the station.